<!-- $Id: add-new-device.xhtml 1172 2007-12-19 09:29:24Z /C=ES/O=Warp Networks S.L./CN=pmarti@warp.es $ -->
<html>
    <head><title>How to add support for a new device</title></head>
    <body>
    
        <h1>How to support a new device</h1>
    
        <p>All devices should inherit from
        <code class="API" base="vmc.common.plugin">DevicePlugin</code>, so far
        there are two main subclasses:
        <code class="API" base="vmc.common.plugin">DBusDevicePlugin</code> and
        <code class="API" base="vmc.common.plugin">RemoteDevicePlugin</code>.
        </p>
    
        <p>A <code class="API" base="vmc.common.plugin">DevicePlugin</code>
        object has the following attributes that you can customise for your
        plugin:
        <ul>
            <li><code>custom</code>: An instance or subclass of
            <code class="API"
            base="vmc.common.hardware.base">Customizer</code></li>
            <li><code>simklass</code>: An instance or subclass of
            <code class="API" base="vmc.common.sim">SIMBaseClass</code></li>
            <li><code>baudrate</code>: At what speed are we going to talk with
            this device (default: 115200).</li>
            <li><code>__remote_name__</code>: As some devices share the same
            vendor_id and product_id, we will issue an <code>AT+CGMR</code>
            command right at the beginning to find out the real device model,
            set this attribute to whatever your device replies to
            <code>AT+CGMR</code>.</li>
        </ul>
        </p>
    
        <p>The object <code class="API"
        base="vmc.common.hardware.base">Customizer</code> acts as a container
        for all the device-specific customizations, such as:
        <ul>
            <li>
                <code>adapter</code>: Specifies the adapter that should be
                used to parse the regular expressions generated in
                <code class="API"
                base="vmc.common.protocol">SIMCardConnection</code>. Further,
                this adapter should graciously handle potential troublesome
                operations such as <code>get_phonebook_size</code>. The
                default adapter is <code class="API"
                base="vmc.common.middleware">SIMCardConnAdapter</code>
            </li>
            
            <li>State machines: Each device its a world on its own, and even
            though they are supposed to support the relevant GSM and 3GPP
            standards, some devices prefer to differ from them. C{Customizer}
            contains references to the state machines that the device should
            use:
                <ul>
                    <li><code>authklass</code>: The state machine used to
                    authenticate against the device, default is
                    <code class="API"
                    base="vmc.common.statem.auth">AuthStateMachine</code>
                    </li>
                    <li><code>netrklass</code>: The state machine used to
                    register on the network, default is
                    <code class="API"
                    base="vmc.common.statem.networkreg">NetworkRegStateMachine
                    </code></li>
                    <li><code>connklass</code>: The state machine used during
                    runtime (once device is properly initalized, authenticated,
                    etc. default is <code class="API"
                    base="vmc.common.statem.networkreg">NetworkRegStateMachine
                    </code>
                    </li>
                </ul>
            </li>
            <li>
                <code>async_regexp</code>: regular expression object that
                will match whatever pattern of unsolicited notifications the
                given device sends us.
            </li>
            <li>
                <code>signal_translations</code>: Dictionary of tuples, each
                tuple has two members: the first is the signal id and the
                second is a function that will translate the signal arguments
                and the signal to the internal representation that VMC uses.
                You can find some example in the <code class="API"
                base="vmc.common.hardware">huawei</code> module.
            </li>
            <li>
                <code>conn_dict</code>: Dictionary with 4 items, each one
                defines the AT string that must be sent to the device in order
                to configure the connection mode preferences (Gprs only,
                3G preferred, etc.) This dictionaries can be shared most of
                the time between different models from the same manufacturer.
            </li>
            <li>
                <code>cmd_dict</code>: Dictionary with information about how
                each command should be processed. <code>cmd_dict</code>
                most of the time will be a shallow copy of the
                <code class="API" base="vmc.common">command</code> dict with
                minor modifications about how a particular command is
                processed on the given device.
            </li>
            <li>
                <code>device_capabilities</code>: List with all the
                unsolicited notifications that this device will send us. If
                the device sends us every RSSI change that detects, we don't
                need to poll manually the device for that information.
            </li>
        </ul>
        </p>
        
        <h2>Overview of a relatively simple DevicePlugin</h2>
        
        <p>Take for example the HuaweiE620 class:</p>
        
        <pre class="python">
        from vmc.common.plugin import DBusDevicePlugin

        from vmc.common.hardware.huawei import HuaweiCustomizer
        
        class HuaweiE620(DBusDevicePlugin):
            """L{vmc.common.plugin.DBusDevicePlugin} for Huawei's E620"""
            name = "Huawei E620"
            version = "0.1"
            author = u"Pablo Martí"
            custom = HuaweiCustomizer
            
            __remote_name__ = "E620"
        
            __properties__ = {
                'usb_device.vendor_id': [0x12d1],
                'usb_device.product_id': [0x1001],
            }
        </pre>
        
        <p>HuaweiE620 is a DBusDevicePlugin, that means that its meant to be
        discovered through DBus. All DBusDevicePlugins sport an attribute that
        we haven't mentioned yet, <code>__properties__</code>. Its just a dict
        with one or more pairs of key, values that must be satisfied so the
        system can say that has "found" the given device. <span
        class="footnote"> Devices are found through dbus/hal, the parameter
        'usb_device.vendor_id' its a hal attribute usually found on usbserial
        devices. In most of the cases, specifying 'usb_device.vendor_id' and
        'usb_device.product_id' should be enough for most of the devices.
        However there are some devices, like Option's GlobeTrotter 3G+,
        that are found in the pci bus.</span>
        </p>
        
        <p>The majority of this 3G devices, will register three serial ports
        with the OS: <code>/dev/ttyUSB{0,1,2}</code> (on Linux). Out of this
        three, usually we will be interested in ttyUSB0 (used for connecting
        to Internet) and ttyUSB2 (used to monitor the device). Finding and
        associating these ports is done in the <code class="API"
        base="vmc.common.plugin.DevicePlugin.extract_info">extract_info</code>.
        If a device doesn't follows this convention, <code>extract_info</code>
        can be overriden and its behaviour modified for that particular
        device.</p>
        
        <h2>Overview of a not so simple DevicePlugin</h2>
        
        <p>Huawei's E220, despite sharing its manufacturer with the E620, has
        a couple of minor differences that deserve some explanation. There's
        a bug in its firmware that will reset the device if you ask its SMSC.
        The workaround is to get once the SMSC before switching to UCS2, you'd
        be amazed of how long took me to discover the fix. The second
        difference with the E620 is that the E220 can have several
        product_ids, thus its allowed to specify them in a list. The third and
        last difference, is that the E220 uses ttyUSB1 instead of ttyUSB2 for
        monitoring the device, thus we have to override
        <code>extract_info</code>.
        
        <pre class="python">
        from vmc.common.exceptions import DeviceLacksExtractInfo
        from vmc.common.sim import SIMBaseClass
        from vmc.common.plugin import DBusDevicePlugin
        from vmc.common.hardware.huawei import HuaweiCustomizer
        
        class HuaweiE220SIMClass(SIMBaseClass):
            """Nozomi SIM Class"""
            def __init__(self, sconn):
                super(HuaweiE220SIMClass, self).__init__(sconn)
            
            def initialize(self):
                d = super(HuaweiE220SIMClass, self).initialize(ucs2=False)
                def initialize_cb(size):
                    self.sconn.get_smsc()
                    # before switching to UCS2, we need to get once the SMSC number
                    # otherwise as soon as we send a SMS, the device would reset
                    # as if it had been unplugged and replugged to the system
                    def process_charset(charset):
                        """
                        Do not set charset to UCS2 if is not necessary, returns size
                        """
			if charset == "UCS2":
			    self.set_charset('UCS2')
			    return size
			else:
			    d = self.sconn.set_charset("UCS2")
			    d.addCallback(lambda ignored: size)
			    return d
                    
                    d2 = self.sconn.get_charset()
                    d2.addCallback(process_charset)
                    return d2
        
                d.addCallback(initialize_cb)
                return d
        
        class HuaweiE220(DBusDevicePlugin):
            """L{vmc.common.plugin.DBusDevicePlugin} for Huawei's E220"""
            name = "Huawei E220"
            version = "0.1"
            author = u"Pablo Martí"
            custom = HuaweiCustomizer
            simklass = HuaweiE220SIMClass
            
            __remote_name__ = "E220"
        
            __properties__ = {
                'usb_device.vendor_id': [0x12d1],
                'usb_device.product_id': [0x1003, 0x1004],
            }
            
            def extract_info(self, children):
                # HW 220 uses ttyUSB0 and ttyUSB1
                for device in children:
                    try:
                        if device['serial.port'] == 1: # control port
                            self.cport = device['serial.device'].encode('utf8')
                        elif device['serial.port'] == 0: # data port
                            self.dport = device['serial.device'].encode('utf8')
                    except KeyError:
                        pass
                
                if not self.cport or not self.dport:
                    raise DeviceLacksExtractInfo(self)
        </pre>
        </p>
        
        <h2>Overview of a complex DevicePlugin</h2>
        
        <p>Option 3G Datacard is the buggiest card we've found so far, and
        has proven to be an excellent challenge for the extensibility and
        granularity of our plugin system. Basically we've found the following
        bugs on the card's firmware:
        <ul>
            <li>If PIN authentication is disabled and you issue an
            <code>AT+CPIN?</code>, the card will reply with a
            <code>+CPIN: SIM PUK2</code>.
            </li>
            <li>Don't ask me why, but <code>AT+CPBR=1,250</code> does not
            work once the application is running. I have tried replacing the
            command with an equivalent one (<code>AT+CPBF=""</code>) without
            luck. Thus the main screen never loads completely. This is were we
            are stuck at, and some input would be really helpful.
            </li>
        </ul>
        
        So we had to modify the AuthStateMachine for this particular device
        and its <code>cmd_dict</code>:
        
        <pre class="python">
        import re
        
        from twisted.python import log
        
        from vmc.common.aterrors import ERROR_REGEXP
        from vmc.common.command import ATCmd
        import vmc.common.exceptions as ex
        from vmc.common.hardware.option import (OptionDBusDevicePlugin,
                                                OptionCustomizer)
        from vmc.common.middleware import SIMCardConnAdapter
        from vmc.common.protocol import SIMCardConnection
        from vmc.common.statem.auth import AuthStateMachine
        from vmc.contrib.epsilon.modal import mode
            
        class Option3GDatacardAuthStateMachine(AuthStateMachine):
            """
            Custom AuthStateMachine for Option's 3G Datacard
            
            This device has a rather buggy firmware that yields all sort of
            weird errors. For example, if PIN authentication is disabled on the SIM
            and you issue an AT+CPIN? command, it will reply with a +CPIN: SIM PUK2
            """
            pin_needed_status = AuthStateMachine.pin_needed_status
            puk_needed_status = AuthStateMachine.puk_needed_status
            puk2_needed_status = AuthStateMachine.puk2_needed_status
            
            class get_pin_status(mode):
                def __enter__(self):
                    pass
                def __exit__(self):
                    pass
                    
                def do_next(self):
                    log.msg("Instantiating get_pin_status mode....")
                    d = self.device.sconn.get_pin_status()
                    d.addCallback(self.get_pin_status_cb)
                    d.addErrback(self.sim_failure_eb)
                    d.addErrback(self.sim_busy_eb)
                    d.addErrback(self.sim_no_present_eb)
                    d.addErrback(log.err)
        
        class Option3GDatacardCustomizer(OptionCustomizer):
            """L{vmc.common.hardware.Customizer} for Option's 3G Datacard"""
            authklass = Option3GDatacardAuthStateMachine
        
        class Option3GDatacard(OptionDBusDevicePlugin):
            """L{vmc.common.plugin.DBusDevicePlugin} for Option's 3G Datacard"""
            name = "Option 3G Datacard"
            version = "0.1"
            author = u"Pablo Martí"
            custom = Option3GDatacardCustomizer
            
            __remote_name__ = "129"
            
            __properties__ = {
                'usb_device.vendor_id' : [0x0af0],
                'usb_device.product_id' : [0x5000],
            }
        
        option3gdatacard = Option3GDatacard()
        </pre>
        </p>
    </body>
</html>
