<!-- $Id:add-new-os.xhtml 439 2007-04-02 17:19:55Z /C=ES/O=Warp Networks S.L./CN=pmarti@warp.es $ -->

<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Add new OS/Distro</title>
</head>

<body>

<h1>Add new OS/Distro</h1>

<h2>OS support overview</h2>

<p>VMCCdfL was originally developed on a Ubuntu system. Being a python
application it should run on any Unix-based system with python support
relatively easily right? Well, unfortunately, that is not the case. Distros
like to patch packages, add and remove features, patch command line options,
ship 'em vanilla, etc. This results on some minor (and not so minor)
differences in packages and paths between distributions that made necessary
to develop a small layer to abstracts these differences. The module
<code>vmc.common.oal</code> was born, OAL stands for OS Abstraction Layer.</p>


<h3>Differences found so far</h3>

<ol>
<li>Depending on the distribution, trying to open a serial port will result in
a "no permissions" exception. This is because depending on the distro and
the security capabilities enabled the default user doesn't has permissions
to open it.</li>
<li>Depending on the distribution, pppd includes a patch that enables a new
directive (replacedefaultroute) that is not included in upstream's pppd. So
far the only distro we have seen without these patches included is
Fedora.</li>
<li>Depending on the distribution, pppd will be suid or not. This means that in
distributions like SuSe we will have to start wvdial with gksudo. Oh did I
mention that gksudo only exists in some distributions? SuSe provides gnomesu,
(which of course has a different syntax from gksudo), while Fedora doesn't
provides anything. This means that in distros like Ubuntu we won't need any
special setup to connect to the internet, in SuSe we will have to provide
a valid password in order to start wvdial, and in Fedora we have to install
gksu from an external repository. This gksu has yet another syntax of
course</li>
<li>Depending on the distribution, wvdial has a different command line syntax.
In Ubuntu/Debian, the parameter to specify a custom config file is
<code>'-C'</code>, while in Fedora/Suse is <code>'--config'</code>.</li>
</ol>

<h2>OAL overview</h2>

<p>OAL provides a function called
<code class="API" base="vmc.common.oal">mark_for_oal</code> that must be used
like gettext's <code>_</code>. If you have a path/string that is OS dependent,
you can mark it and it will be translated in runtime to the appropiated
value.</p>

<p>Obviously you must specify beforehand the value of those translations. In
order to do so, you must override the
<code class="API" base="vmc.common.oal">BaseDistribution</code> class. Take
for example the DebianBasedDistribution class:</p>

<pre class="python">

class DebianBasedDistribution(BaseDistribution):
    __required__ = '/etc/debian_version'
</pre>

<p>The <code>__required__</code> attribute specifies a file which if exists,
means that VMCCdfL is running on the given OS/Distro.</p>

<p>Now lets have a look at the SuSeBasedDistribution class:</p>

<pre class="python">
class SuseBasedDistribution(BaseDistribution):
    __required__ = '/etc/SuSE-release'
    customization = {'WVDIAL_CONN_SWITCH' : '--config',
                     'gksudo_name' : 'gnomesu'}
</pre>
 
<p>The <code>customization</code> attribute is a dictionary whose keys are
the <code>mark_for_oal</code> identifier and the corresponding value for that
OS/Distro. If the attribute is present in a class, the default dictionary will
be updated with the new values.</p>

<h3>Register the new OS with the OS DB</h3>

You have to register your new class with the OS DB. Add a reference of your
class to <code class="API" base="vmc.common.oal">OSNAME_COLLECTION</code>.
In the future, you will have to copy your plugin to the plugin dir.

</body>
</html>
